The World Economic Forum 2019 took place from January 20 to 26th in Davos Switzerland.

Despite much of the negative press after the weeklong meetings of world – and tech -leaders in Davos, Switzerland, I find 3 key positive takeaways are worth noting.

Humanity is experiencing unprecedented exponential disruptive innovation

I have been teaching the divergence of exponential disruptive innovation trends for over 5 years. It was very refreshing to finally see others on the world stage step up and confirm the implications of these trends for what is now called Industry 4.0.

Decentralization starts to play a role in addressing issues emerging from exponential technological innovation

Participating in several panel discussions and discussion groups with world leaders in technology, I expected (and experienced) the usual platitudes and politically vetted statements about companies’ efforts to support technology for the betterment of humanity. One particular panel with worldwide renowned leaders in technology addressed the issue of “Understanding Disruption: How the World Can Work Together so Technology Works for All.” After almost 2 hours of mostly platitudes with some exceptions in the context of governance needs raised by exponential disruptive innovation and the need for worldwide standards, I raised the issue on the potential use of decentralization protocols for unbiased, incorruptible, and evolving governance. After speaking for about 2 minutes, I was astounded to find the entirety of panelists agreeing with me publicly (at the very end of the panel) and acknowledging that centralized governance has and continues to fail in addressing the issues that are emerging in disruptive technologies. The reactions and discussions after the panel suggest, and make me very hopeful, that the decentralization protocols developed by the Semada Research Institute will continue to play a larger role in the future of emerging technology solutions for humanity.

The Sustainable Development Goals of the UN (SDGs) can help channel the emerging technological opportunities

The Future of Humanity panel at WEF19, underscored the use of technology to further and attain the SDGS. During a day-long event, it became clear that most of the SDG goals that are being pursued by different technology companies involve several use cases for decentralization protocols.

Presenting my scholarship and the corresponding protocols of the Semada Research Institute at the Future of Humanity panel at WEF19, I underscored that the research agenda of the Semada Research Institute (SLUG – Stability, Liquidity, Utility, and Governance) is for everyone, meaning we see the research agenda as an infrastructure development effort to help other technology companies support and attain the SDGs. Semada’s decentralization protocols first and foremost support SDG #10 – Equality for All.
