Christian Kirchner Memorial Symposium

Sept. 6, 2014 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.

University of St. Thomas School of Law

Board of Governors Room

The Christian Kirchner Memorial Symposium brings together leading law and economics scholars from around the world to honor Kirchner’s life and work.

Professor Dr. jur. Dr. rer. pol . Dr. h. c. Christian Kirchner, LL.M., was an internationally renowned professor and scholar. He was most recognized for his work at the intersection of law and economics and especially New Institutional Economics, antitrust law, and company Law. The author of over 270 articles and books, Kirchner was highly sought after as a visiting professor and taught in Switzerland, the United States, Mexico, Israel, Japan and China. Kirchner also served as a board member of the Wittenberg Center for Global Ethics, where his work on management remuneration in the banking sector resulted in substantive regulatory commitments by the five leading German banks. Christian Kirchner passed away on Jan. 17, 2014.

List of participants:

Tom Ulen, Swanlund Chair Emeritus, Illinois College of Law

Francesco Parisi, Oppenheimer Wolff and Donnelly Professor of Law, University of Minnesota Law School

Claire Hill, James L. Krusemark Chair in Law, University of Minnesota Law School

Brett McDonnell, Professor of Law, University of Minnesota Law School

Erich Schanze, Permanent Visiting Professor, University of Bergen, Norway and Lecturer for Law and Economics, University of St. Gallen, Switzerland

Christine Windbichler, Professor of Law, Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany

Mathias Schmidt, Professor of Business, University of Leipzig, Germany

Andreas Schwartze, Professor of Law, University of Innsbruck, Austria

Andreas Engert, Professor of Law, University of Mannheim, Germany

Xujun Gao, Professor and Director of the German and EU Law Center, Tongji University Law School, Shanghai, China

Jesik S. Hong, Professor of Law, Shimane University, Japan

Philip C. Hanke, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Netherlands

David Ehmke, University of Oxford, UK, and Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany
