Click here to register.

Please join us on Sept. 11, for the Symposium on Global Business Ethics at the University of St. Thomas School of Law.

The Symposium on Global Business Ethics at the University of St. Thomas School of Law brings together leading scholars on legal and business ethics from Europe and the United States. Initiated by the late Christian Kirchner (1944-2014) with substantive involvement of the Wittenberg Center for Global Ethics, the symposium enables cross-cultural and transatlantic scholarly dialogue in the context of global business ethics across different scholarly traditions. The symposium is intended to build consensus on important ethics issues, foster dialogue, and enable future cooperation.

Welcome
Wulf Kaal, University of St. Thomas School of Law

“Did September 11 Make Global Ethics Impossible?”
Kenneth Goodpaster, University of St. Thomas Opus College of Business

Individual Responsibility Panel
“It Satisfies the Key Stakeholders – But is it the Right Thing To Do?” Kenneth Goodpaster, University of St. Thomas Opus College of Business
“Engaging Each Client’s and Lawyer’s Tradition in Balancing Self- Interest and Responsibility to Others” Neil Hamilton, University of St. Thomas School of Law
“Can Foreign Direct Investment Contribute to Restoring Social Order?” Roland Bardy, Florida Gulf Coast University, Lutgert College of Business

Order Ethics Panel
“Order Ethics in the Globalized World” Christoph Luetge, Technical University of Munich
“The Relevance of Experimental Research for Normative Business Ethics” Philipp Schreck, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
“Morrison v. National Australia Bank – Implications for Business Ethics” Richard Painter, University of Minnesota Law School
“Order Ethics and the Founding and Early Undertakings of the Wittenberg Center for Global Ethic” Paul Rosser, Wittenberg Center for Global Ethics

Transatlantic Discussion
“Individual Responsibility vs. Corporate Responsibility and Liability – Transatlantic Perspectives”

This event is co-sponsored by the German American Chamber of Commerce, Goethe Institute, Consulate General of the Federal Republic of Germany Chicago, Honorary Consul of the Federal Republic of Germany Minneapolis, Minnesota International Center, and the Holloran Center for Ethical Leadership in the Professions.

REGISTER NOW

John P. Fandrey
Editor in Chief
University of St. Thomas Law Journal
fand1248@stthomas.edu
www.stthomas.edu/law/lawjournal

Organizer
Wulf Kaal
Associate Professor
University of St. Thomas School of Law

University of St. Thomas – 1000 LaSalle Ave MSL 124 – Minneapolis, Minnesota – 55403 – USA
